Metric expressions for frequently asked K8s use-cases (#77)
Dynatrace/dynatrace-api: metric-example/metric-expressions-for-k8s.md

# Metric Expressions for K8s
This document collects frequently asked metric expressions for typical K8s use-cases. Listed metric expressions can be used for [charting](https://www.dynatrace.com/support/help/how-to-use-dynatrace/dashboards-and-charts/explorer/explorer-advanced-query-editor/) or alerting using [custom metric events](https://www.dynatrace.com/support/help/how-to-use-dynatrace/problem-detection-and-analysis/problem-detection/metric-events-for-alerting/advanced-metric-queries/).

**Table of contents**

<!-- TOC -->

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Important note](#important-note)

> - [Nodes utilization](#nodes-utilization)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Node utilization](#node-utilization)
```

    - [CPU](#cpu)
    - [Memory](#memory)
- [Node conditions](#node-conditions)

> - [Workloads health](#workloads-health)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Workload health](#workload-health)
```

    - [Not all pods running](#not-all-pods-running)
    - [Not all containers running](#not-all-containers-running)
- [Workloads resource utilization and optimization](#workloads-resource-utilization-and-optimization)
    - [Slack](#slack)
    - [Usage above requests](#usage-above-requests)
    - [Usage in terms of limits](#usage-in-terms-of-limits)

>     - [High trotthling](#high-trotthling)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [High throttling](#high-throttling)
```

    - [Memory](#memory)
    - [High container restart rate](#high-container-restart-rate)
- [Further Reading](#further-reading)

<!-- /TOC -->

## Prerequisites
This document assumes basic familiarity with metric selectors. If you don't yet feel comfortable with simple metric selectors, consider reading
through [Query by Example](query-by-example.md) first.

You can try the examples listed here through the Web UI via _Data Explorer_,
or you can send selectors to the `/v2/metrics/query` API for evaluation.

## Important note

> **Depending on the size of your environment, the following examples might put extrem load on your Dynatrace environment. Please use with care and try using filters whenever possible to narrow the scope of these queries.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Depending on the size of your environment, the following examples might put extreme load on your Dynatrace environment. Please use with care and try using filters whenever possible to narrow the scope of these queries.**
```

> [//]: # (For Dynatrace employees: A dashboard containing all these metric expressions can be found here: https://stratus.dev.dynatracelabs.com/#dashboard;gtf=-2h;gf=all;id=64bfca68-49ec-4628-92d2-ab38d0cf28f7)

Reviewer: What is this syntax for? It seems this part is invisible 🤔 
https://github.com/floriangeigl/dynatrace-api/blob/master/metric-example/metric-expressions-for-k8s.md

Author: yes - it's a comment in markdown.

> ## Nodes utilization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Node utilization
```

Let's start of with some simple metric expressions to measure relative nodes utilization in terms of usage, requests and limits over time.

### CPU

> For CPU **usage**, we can use the builtin:host.cpu.usage metric in combination with an entitiy-selector filtering for only hosts that are part of any Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For CPU **usage**, we can use the builtin:host.cpu.usage metric in combination with an entity-selector filtering for only hosts that are part of any Kubernetes cluster.
```

```
builtin:host.cpu.usage:avg
:filter(in("dt.entity.host", entitySelector("type(HOST),toRelationships.IS_KUBERNETES_CLUSTER_OF_HOST(type(KUBERNETES_CLUSTER),entityName())")))
```
For **requests** we can divide the requested CPU by the total number of cores available on each node.
```
(builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.cpuRequested:avg)
/(builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.cores:avg)
*(100)
```

> Same can be done for **limits** as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same can be done for **limits** as follows:
```

```
(builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.cpuLimit:avg)
/(builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.cores:avg)
*(100)
```

> Let us reduce the scope of these queries to only nodes of a given cluster. This is especially important if you want to set up an alert in the scope of a single cluster. The scope is narrowed down to a single cluster by attaching a **filter** for the cluster entity. For example, for usage this would result in the following metric expresion. Note: Replace *KUBERNETES_CLUSTER-44D2F1E49BE901AF* with the entitiy-id of your Kubernetes cluster. The easiest way to get the entitiy-id of your cluster, is by simply navigating to the cluster within the Dynatrace Web UI - you can find the ID there within the URL in the adress bar of your browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's reduce the scope of these queries to only nodes of a given cluster. This is especially important if you want to set up an alert in the scope of a single cluster. The scope is narrowed down to a single cluster by attaching a **filter** for the cluster entity. For **usage** this results in the following metric expression. Note: Replace *KUBERNETES_CLUSTER-44D2F1E49BE901AF* with the entity-ID of your Kubernetes cluster. The easiest way to get the entity-ID of your cluster, is to navigate to the cluster within the Dynatrace Web UI - you'll see the ID in the URL in your browser's address bar.
```

**Usage**
```
builtin:host.cpu.usage:avg
:filter(in("dt.entity.host", entitySelector("type(HOST),toRelationships.IS_KUBERNETES_CLUSTER_OF_HOST(type(KUBERNETES_CLUSTER),entityId(KUBERNETES_CLUSTER-44D2F1E49BE901AF))")))
```
We can further expand this query and only count nodes of a cluster with a CPU usage above a certain threshold. In other words: "How many of my cluster's nodes have CPU usage over 80%".

> *Note: Replace "KUBERNETES_CLUSTER-44D2F1E49BE901AF" with the entitiy-id of your Kubernetes cluster and 80 with your desired CPU usage threshold.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note: Replace "KUBERNETES_CLUSTER-44D2F1E49BE901AF" with the entity-ID of your Kubernetes cluster and 80 with your desired CPU usage threshold.*
```

```
builtin:host.cpu.usage:avg
:filter(in("dt.entity.host", entitySelector("type(HOST),toRelationships.IS_KUBERNETES_CLUSTER_OF_HOST(type(KUBERNETES_CLUSTER),entityId(KUBERNETES_CLUSTER-44D2F1E49BE901AF))")))
:filter(series(avg,gt,80)):splitby():count
```
We can modify this query to also answer the reverse question: "How many of my cluster's nodes have CPU usage below 80%". Just replace *gt* with *lt*.
```
builtin:host.cpu.usage:avg
:filter(in("dt.entity.host", entitySelector("type(HOST),toRelationships.IS_KUBERNETES_CLUSTER_OF_HOST(type(KUBERNETES_CLUSTER),entityId(KUBERNETES_CLUSTER-44D2F1E49BE901AF))")))
:filter(series(avg,lt,80)):splitby():count
```

> By replacing the *usage* part of this query, we can solve the same use-cases in terms of **requests** and **limits**. For example, for **requests** the last metric expression above would result in the following query:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By replacing the *usage* part of this query, we can solve the same use cases for **requests** and **limits**. For example, for **requests** the last metric expression above would result in the following query:
```

```
(
  (builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.cpuRequested:avg)
  /(builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.cores:avg)
  *(100)
)
:filter(in("dt.entity.kubernetes_node", entitySelector("type(KUBERNETES_NODE),toRelationships.IS_KUBERNETES_CLUSTER_OF_NODE(type(KUBERNETES_CLUSTER),entityId(KUBERNETES_CLUSTER-44D2F1E49BE901AF))")))
:filter(series(avg,lt,80)):splitby():count
```

### Memory

> The metric expresions used for *CPU* can easily be adapted to *Memory* by just replacing the CPU related metrics with the proper memory related metric:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metric expressions used for *CPU* can easily be adapted to *Memory* by just replacing the CPU related metrics with the proper memory related metric:
```

* builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.cores -> builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.memory
* builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.cpuAvailable -> builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.memoryAvailable
* builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.cpuRequested -> builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.memoryRequested
* builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.cpuLimit -> builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.memoryLimit

## Node conditions

> For node conditions, it's important to understand, that a single node can have multiple conditions at the same time, such as, *DiskPressue* and *MemoryPressure*. Consequently, the used metric offers a dimension for each condition (node_condition), that can either be true or false (condition_status) at any given point in time. Hence, we can chart which nodes have any not-ready condition. Of course, we can also use this metric expression for setting up a [custom event for alerting](https://www.dynatrace.com/support/help/how-to-use-dynatrace/problem-detection-and-analysis/problem-detection/metric-events-for-alerting#create-a-metric-event). Again, you could reduce the scope of this query to a single cluster by adding a proper filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For node conditions, it's important to understand, that a single node can have multiple conditions at the same time, such as, *DiskPressure* and *MemoryPressure*. Consequently, the used metric offers a dimension for each condition (node_condition), that can either be true or false (condition_status) at any given point in time. Hence, we can chart which nodes have any not-ready conditions. Of course, we can also use this metric expression for setting up a [custom event for alerting](https://www.dynatrace.com/support/help/how-to-use-dynatrace/problem-detection-and-analysis/problem-detection/metric-events-for-alerting#create-a-metric-event). Again, you could reduce the scope of this query to a single cluster by adding a proper filter.
```

```
builtin:cloud.kubernetes.node.conditions:
filter(and(ne(node_condition,Ready),eq(condition_status,True))):splitBy("dt.entity.kubernetes_cluster","dt.entity.kubernetes_node","node_condition"):count
```

> ## Workloads health

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Workload health
```

> Let's use metric expressions to monitor the health of our workloads. We **strongly recommend**, to scope such espressions to single workloads, by adding a **filter**. In the following examples, all expressions will be filtered to a sample workload by appending the following filter: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's use metric expressions to monitor the health of our workloads. We **strongly recommend**, to scope such expressions to a single workload, by adding a **filter**. In the following examples, all expressions will be filtered to a sample workload by appending the following filter: 
```

```:filter(and(in("dt.entity.cloud_application",entitySelector("type(cloud_application),entityId(~"CLOUD_APPLICATION-A26E32FC302257AB~")"))))```

> To adapt this to your scenario, simply replace "CLOUD_APPLICATION-A26E32FC302257AB" with the workload id of your workload. Again, you can find the id within the URL in the adress bar of your browser while viewing the workload in our Web UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To adapt this to your scenario, simply replace "CLOUD_APPLICATION-A26E32FC302257AB" with the workload ID of your workload. Again, you can find the ID in the URL in your browser while viewing the workload in the Dynatrace Web UI.
```
Shorter version of "URL in..." seems ok for the second occurence

### Not all pods running
Using the following query, you can find how many pods are not running compared to the number of desired pods of this workload.
```
( 
  (builtin:cloud.kubernetes.workload.desiredPods):splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application")
  -(builtin:cloud.kubernetes.workload.pods):splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application")
)
:filter(and(in("dt.entity.cloud_application",entitySelector("type(cloud_application),entityId(~"CLOUD_APPLICATION-A26E32FC302257AB~")"))))
```

### Not all containers running
Using the following query, you can find how many containers are not running compared to the number of desired containers of this workload.
```
( 
  (builtin:cloud.kubernetes.pod.desiredContainers):parents:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application")
  -(builtin:cloud.kubernetes.pod.containers):parents:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application")
)
:filter(and(in("dt.entity.cloud_application",entitySelector("type(cloud_application),entityId(~"CLOUD_APPLICATION-A26E32FC302257AB~")"))))
```

## Workloads resource utilization and optimization
Let's use some metric expressions to understand if we have **proper requests and limits** in place for our workloads. 

> We start by looking into the relation between usage and requests. Usually, one tries to have usage just below reqeuest. So which workloads are requesting far more CPU or Memory, than they actually use - this is usually refered to as *slack*. The following examples will only walk you through CPU related topics. They can easily by adapted to memory, by replacing the CPU metrics with their memory counterpart metrics. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We start by looking into the relation between usage and requests. Usually, one tries to have usage just below requests. So which workloads are requesting far more CPU or Memory, than they actually use - this is usually referred to as *slack*. The following examples will only walk you through CPU related topics. They can easily by adapted to memory, by replacing the CPU metrics with their memory counterpart metrics. 
```

### Slack
```
(
    (builtin:cloud.kubernetes.pod.cpuRequests:parents:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application_instance","dt.entity.cloud_application"):avg)
    -(builtin:containers.cpu.usageMilliCores:parents:parents:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application_instance","dt.entity.cloud_application"):avg)
)
:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application"):avg
:filter(and(in("dt.entity.cloud_application",entitySelector("type(cloud_application),entityId(~"CLOUD_APPLICATION-A26E32FC302257AB~")"))))
```

> *Note: We are using **:parents**, to be able to split and filter by entities being higher in the Kubernetes entity hierarchy, which is defined as follows: container -> pod -> workload -> namespace -> cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note: We are using **:parents**, to split and filter by entities that are higher in the Kubernetes entity hierarchy (container -> pod -> workload -> namespace -> cluster).
```

> You can also increase the scope of this query to multiple workloads, by expanding the scope of the filter or just removing it. Just be aware, that in very large environments, this can put a lot of stress onto your Dynatrace environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also increase the scope of this query to multiple workloads by expanding the scope of the filter or just removing it. Just be aware, that in very large environments this can put a lot of stress on your Dynatrace environment.
```

### Usage above requests

> Using the following query, we can see which workloads have a higher CPU usgae, than requested. Meaning, for such workloads one should consider increasing the set requests to increase the stabilitiy of this workload as well as the stabilitiy of the Kubernetes cluster it is running on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the following query, we can see which workloads have a higher CPU usage than requested. Meaning, for such workloads one should consider increasing the set requests to increase the stability of the workload as well as the stability of the Kubernetes cluster it is running on.
```

```
(
    (builtin:containers.cpu.usageMilliCores:parents:parents:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application_instance","dt.entity.cloud_application"):avg)
    -(builtin:cloud.kubernetes.pod.cpuRequests:parents:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application_instance","dt.entity.cloud_application"):avg)
)
:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application"):avg
:filter(and(in("dt.entity.cloud_application",entitySelector("type(cloud_application),entityId(~"CLOUD_APPLICATION-A26E32FC302257AB~")"))))
```

### Usage in terms of limits

> Users afraid of throttling, often want to alert on the percentage of limits being used. However, we suggest to alert on throttling relative to usage. Reason for this is, that the relative usage in terms of limits is not the only deciding factor for when Kubernetes starts to throttle containers - we'll cover this in the next example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users afraid of throttling, often want to alert on the percentage of limits being used. However, we suggest to alert on throttling relative to usage. The reason for this is, that the relative usage in terms of limits is not the only deciding factor for when Kubernetes starts to throttle containers - we'll cover that in the next example.
```

```
(
    (builtin:containers.cpu.usageMilliCores:avg:parents:parents:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application_instance","dt.entity.cloud_application"):sum)
    /(builtin:cloud.kubernetes.pod.cpuLimits:avg:parents:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application_instance","dt.entity.cloud_application"):sum)
    *(100)
)
:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application"):avg
:filter(and(in("dt.entity.cloud_application",entitySelector("type(cloud_application),entityId(~"CLOUD_APPLICATION-A26E32FC302257AB~")"))))
```

> ### High trotthling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### High throttling
```

> As mentioned, it makes more sense to alert on the outcome rather than only on one of mulitple potential triggers for throttling. In other words, track throttling relative to usage instead of usage in terms of limits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned, it makes more sense to alert on the outcome rather than only on one of multiple potential triggers for throttling. In other words, track throttling relative to usage instead of usage in terms of limits.
```

```
(
    (builtin:containers.cpu.throttledMilliCores:avg:parents:parents:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application_instance","dt.entity.cloud_application"):sum)
    /(builtin:containers.cpu.usageMilliCores:avg:parents:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application_instance","dt.entity.cloud_application"):sum)
    *(100)
)
:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application"):avg
:filter(and(in("dt.entity.cloud_application",entitySelector("type(cloud_application),entityId(~"CLOUD_APPLICATION-A26E32FC302257AB~")"))))
```

### Memory

> Most of the metric expressions shown above can be adapt for memory realted use-cases by simply replacing the CPU metrics with the proper memory metrics. However, there is one important difference: While high CPU usage leads to throttling, high memory usage leads to out-of-memory kills, and thus container restarts. Consequently, it makes sense to keep track of container restarts. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the metric expressions shown above can be adapted for memory related use cases by simply replacing the CPU metrics with the proper memory metrics. However, there is one important difference: While high CPU usage leads to throttling, high memory usage leads to out-of-memory kills, and thus container restarts. Consequently, it makes sense to keep track of container restarts. 
```

### High container restart rate
```
(
  (builtin:cloud.kubernetes.pod.containerRestarts:max:delta:parents)
  :splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application")
  :sum
)
:splitBy("dt.entity.cloud_application"):sum
:filter(and(in("dt.entity.cloud_application",entitySelector("type(cloud_application),entityId(~"CLOUD_APPLICATION-A26E32FC302257AB~")"))))
```
*Note: Be aware, that the restart metric for containers is only available if we observed at least one restart. Consequently, for pods with no container restarts, there won't be any data.*

## Further Reading
Please refer to the documentation on metric expressions on [dyntrace.com](https://www.dynatrace.com/support/help/dynatrace-api/environment-api/metric-v2/metric-expressions/)

> for additional technical details such as:

Reviewer: Unnecessary line-break
